Welcome to the Parametric Design introduction.
Before we go into the actual parametric design,
i want to quickly go into the modern design
process, which is nowadays completely digital.
So we have various applications, coming from
various providers, like Adobe or the Sketch App,
which is used by many interface designers, or
Figma. And all those applications come with this
kind of idea, as Figma says it here, "bring ideas
to life". So that we can make anything possible
and be super innovative and super efficient.
But when we look at how we interact with those
applications, they of course have tons of great
features, but as they are designed by other people
for us, we also have to use their concepts,
their ideas of how we construct our designs.
So there's also certain limitations, when we use
those applications, about how we actually turn our
ideas into actual visual artifacts. And sometimes
we need to take a step back from using these great
applications and really think about our ideas and
can those applications, that have been designed
and developed by other people for us, actually are
they the right tool to bring our ideas to life.
Or are we actually only using the way that they
have developed for us, to create our designs.
And is this not really helping us bring our our
own ideas to life. And of course every medium has
its limitations. Even if we work on paper we are
limited by the tools that we have at hand. But in
paper for example, we still are able to do so much
more, we can crumble our paper, we can put it on
fire, we can dip it in liquid colors, paint, we
can do whatever we want with this piece of paper.
But in the digital world we are really limited
to those tools that others have provided for us.
And we're not really able to get completely
creative, because we need to use those tools. So
in this seminar, we're really trying to go beyond
those limitations. Try to think about how can we
create our own tools and really bring our ideas to
life. But when we're talking about digital design,
we also need to talk about what kind of data
are we generating through our design process.
So it's usually starts with raw text, this is
like the most raw kind of output we can generate.
On the next level, we have layouted documents.
So here every piece of text has additional
information, on how to present it, where it's
positioned on a page, what kind of font, what kind
of font size, etc. So these documents are usually
some kind of markup documents, where every piece
of text has additional information on styling,
etc. And then we have image data. Image data
has individual pixels, where each pixel has some
color information to it and that's basically
it. And then we have the next level, which is
vector information. So on vector information,
they're a lot more complex than the raster
pixel information, here we have individual paths
that are connected and here we have the
two layers, on the one hand we have 2D data
and then we have 3D data. Even 3D
data is made up of vector information,
so here we have individual points,
that are connected to one another,
those create different planes and through these
different planes we can create our bodies.
In this seminar we will primarily work with image
data and vector data. We will use these two types
of output, because we can use these two types of
outputs in a variety of different applications.
So the things we will generate through code, we
can then use to import them into other types of
applications. Again so when we talk about these
different types of files, the applications are
then our interpreters, they help us see what is
inside those files, and they help us manipulate
those files, through interactions, through the
interactions that the developers provide for us.
And when we talk about these kind of
files that we open through applications,
we also need to talk about the different
types of file formats that are out there.
There are so called proprietary formats.
Proprietary formats are used by companies to limit
the kinds of applications you open a file with.
So a propriety format can only be opened with
a certain application, from a certain company.
These are the type of files we are not looking
into in this seminar. We are looking for open
formats, open formats can be opened by a lot
of different applications. Ideally, an open format
is strongly standardized. A good example for this,
is the SVG format. The SVG format is a format that
allows us to store vector information in it. The
the SVG format is being generated and controlled
by an open community, by a big open community.
So it's very well documented, it's an open format
and it's well standardized. So nowadays thanks
to this process, any kind of a graphics editing
application can open an SVG format. So these are
the kinds of formats we're trying to export, so
that our information, that we generate our design
files, we generate are perfectly compatible,
with any kinds of applications out there.
The idea again instead of only having the
interpreter, our applications, and the interfaces
that are provided for us, we build code or we
build our own applications, through code, which
are then exporting certain design files, which
we can then open in other design applications
and continue working on them. And we will do this
for 3D information, as well as 2D information.
And we will use two different kinds of libraries
for this. We will use JSCAD, which is a 3D design
application and p5js, which we will use for
the raster information as well as 2D vector
information. And the output we can really use in a
variety of different processes, like fabrication:
like 3D printing or cnc milling or laser cutting
traditional printing or working with textiles
or even a cutter service, where you can cut
out things from paper or fabrics or other
materials. So there's a really really big variety
on how to use these different types of outputs.
And of course in digital design there's even more
ways you can use this. And just to give you a few
examples: from web development to AR and VR to
video, you could generate a series of images
and turn it into a video or to go even further
import data and visualize the data and, thereby,
create a data visualization, or you could use
the generated images as textures or bump maps
in any 3D application that you use for
3D design. What is parametric design?
There's a lot of different definitions
out there. So every community has another
definition and there's also other names for
parametric design, like generative design.
And for example in architecture Zaha Hadid and her
colleagues wrote a parametric design manifesto,
where they are trying to describe their personal,
individual perspective on parametric design in
architecture. But what brings all those different
definitions together is really the basic idea of
parametric design. In traditional design we move
and layout and design individual objects manually,
so we select colors, we define an exact size of
an object, we position it on a canvas somewhere.
In parametric design we're trying to remove
this manual process to a certain degree and
replace it through these parameters. The
parameters are basically definitions.
So for example let's say we have a simple design
here and we want to make these different radii,
the the inner radius, the outer radius. We want
to design through parameters. So we could define
an outer parameter, then we can define the
inner parameter and even make them related
to one another. So we could say the inner radius
for example is 90 percent of the outer radius.
The idea is really to define these different
parameters and based on these parameters we
generate our design. We can design ratios, so
there's a certain ratio between width and height
for example. Or between different thickness of
different borders and lines etc. And these for
example can help us design and develop complex
different patterns and variations of patterns.
And throughout the next few slides i will try to
show you a lot of different examples where we see
parametric design being applied in
various different fields. A good example,
a current example, is the latest Android system.
In the latest Android system, they developed a
new way of how the UI is designed or how the
colors of the UI are applied to the system.
And so here in the latest version, you can
choose a background image for your home screen
and based on the background image a few dominant
colors are being extracted from the image and
those colors from the image are then being
applied to the overall UI in the whole system.
And this shows really nicely what is extremely
important and very different to traditional design
in parametric design, because in parametric design
you really need to learn how to think in systems.
So you need to move away from designing small
individual objects, but really think about
the relationship between different objects, for
example think about the relationship of contrast
between different colors. When you extract
dominant colors from an image, you also need to
think about that you need to have foreground and
background colors and you need to have contrast
between them, so that people can actually
differentiate between different layers and
elements. So you really need to think about rules
and systems when it comes to parametric design.
This is a really nice example
going back into the analog again.
Boris Müller, one of our professors here at the
interface design department, he did a poster
series. It's almost 10 years ago, so it's an old
project, but i think they're still beautiful.
He developed these generative designs to create
these really nice patterns and he actually in most
of them he actually also used data to generate
them. And he then uses them in a poster design.
So you can take these generative designs that
were create through code and bring them again
into analog designs, into print designs
or poster designs. There's a lot of nice
examples in the corporate design world,
where there are generative logos being
developed. Like this one, from onformative or
here an example that was developed a few years ago
for the MIT media lab. And here you can see again,
through parametric design there's one system being
generated, but based on those system, there's
a whole variation of different outputs being
generated here. Or here's a nice example from
a conference, that was done by some researchers
here at our university a few years back, and they
created this generative header for their website.
And this is also really great for
experimentation. You could for example
use some random values that are being generated
in your design, so certain parameters are fixed,
certain parameters are random and, thereby,
just generate some different outputs and see
how things interact with one another and really
explore different variations of your design.
And of course this also works in a 3D space.
Here's an example where designers explore
different variations of a 3D space and a
system to generate different 3D models.
And what is also great about generating
things through code, so visual artifacts,
is that you can also create very very complex
things, that would take ages to build manually,
through code really quickly. Like building things,
like this here, where you have different shapes
and different structures, but through different
mathematical formulas you can generate those
shapes automatically, without no need of actually
placing all these different vectors in 3D space.
And you can do this for all kinds of
products and concepts in 3D space.
And there's a lot of different
math formulas that we will also
look into, in this seminar. And in architecture
there's a lot of great examples, where generative
design or parametric design is used to explore
variations, but also create shapes that would
otherwise be way too complex to generate manually.
Zaha Hadid and her team did a lot of great
work on algorithmic design and parametric design
to generate new shapes that would otherwise be not
possible to generate. A good example also is the
Elb-philharmonie in Hamburg. Here the the windows,
that we can see, were also designed through
an algorithmic design process to generate
this visual scene that we can see now here. In
how the windows being placed on the building.
And especially in facades we can do a lot of
interesting things to generative design concepts,
explore different variations even have things like
the weather, interact with our facades, so that
our our parametric design facade is changing as
certain parameters in our environment change. Or
we can take it a step further and also use other
things from kinetic to screens to change facades
and how they interact with the environment.
To get started and for inspiration, there's a
really great book called Generative Design, which
has a lot of great mostly 2D examples to get you
started, what is nice about the book, is that you
also get code examples for every example showed in
the book. To give you a really nice introduction
and some examples to get started with.
In my personal work, i work a lot with data
and generative or parametric design. This is
an example here, where we used spatial data to
visualize the green and water spaces in Berlin.
And try to take it a step further into
the physical and we used a laser cutter
to create this 3D map of Berlin and then we used
plants to actually visualize the green spaces.
Or here, taken the third dimension even further,
creating 3D city maps from data in Berlin.
So from these basic examples, that we will
all look into, throughout the semester. Of
course you can take it even further, from data
visualization to other kinds of applications that
have parametric design already implemented. Like
Rhino 3D. They have a lot of parametric design
capabilities right built in. And so you can use
all the knowledge that you will gain from the
seminar, for example in other applications that
are already made for these kind of processes.
So parametric design is really about
going beyond the design capabilities that
software already provides for us and really
thinking about how can you bring your ideas
to life through code, through your
own applications that you will write.